A book cipher is a cipher in which each word or letter in the plaintext of a message is replaced by some code that locates it in another text, the key.
A simple version of such a cipher would use a specific book as the key
and would replace each word of the plaintext by a number that gives the position where that word occurs in that book.
For example, if the chosen key is H. G. Wells's novel The War of the Worlds, the plaintext "all plans failed, coming back tomorrow" could be encoded as "335 219 881, 5600 853 9315" — since the 335th word of the novel is "all",
the 219th is "plans", etc. This method requires that the sender and receiver are using the exact same edition of the key book.[1]
This simple version fails if the message uses a word that does not appear in the text.
A variant that avoids this problem works with individual letters rather than words.
Namely each letter of the plaintext message would be replaced by a number that specifies where that letter occurs in the key book.
For example, using the same War of the Worlds book as the key, the message "no ammo" could be encoded as "12 10 / 50 31 59 34" since the words with those positions in the novel are "nineteenth", "of", "almost", "mortal", "might", and "own".
This method was used in the second Beale cipher.
This variant is more properly called a substitution cipher, specifically a homophonic one.
Both methods, as described, are quite laborious.
Therefore, in practice, the key has usually been a codebook created for the purpose: a simple dictionary-like listing of all the words that might be needed to form a message, each with the respective code number(s).
This version is called a code, and was extensively used from the 15th century up to World War II.
The main strength of a book cipher is the key.
The sender and receiver of encoded messages can agree to use any book or other publication available to both of them as the key to their cipher.
Someone intercepting the message and attempting to decode it, unless they are a skilled cryptographer (see Security below), must somehow identify the key from a huge number of possibilities available.
In the context of espionage, a book cipher has a considerable advantage for a spy in enemy territory. A conventional codebook, if discovered by the local authorities, instantly incriminates the holder as a spy and gives the authorities the chance of deciphering the code and sending false messages impersonating the agent.
On the other hand, a book, if chosen carefully to fit with the spy's cover story, would seem entirely innocuous.
The drawback to a book cipher is that both parties have to possess an identical copy of the key.
The book must not be of the sort that would look out of place in the possession of those using it, and it must be of a type likely to contain any words required.
Thus, a spy wishing to send information about troop movements and numbers of armaments would be unlikely to find a cookbook or romance novel useful keys.